### UChicago Personal statement

**Second  paragraph, middle**. "It wasn't just *what* is taught that excited me, but also *how* these courses are taught. (Actually, Sarah, you don't really write about *how* the material is taught. When we hear that phrase, we tend to think about whether a course is a lecture, or a discussion-based and whether there are simply tests or innovative research evaluations. I think what you mean here is that not only are the titles of the courses intriguing, but the particulars of the class really appeal to you.)

So:

I get most exited about history, because it offers lessons, parallels, and explanations for the problems we face today. While many people do not see the relevance of history, UChicago thankfully does. Its history department is one the best places to explore my interest. Looking at Chicago's course listings, I saw 24 history courses that immediately appealed to me. With so many compelling courses, I am reasonably sure I won't be closed out. I was fascinated not only by the titles of those 24 but also by the particular topics under investigation. To take one example, "Lost Histories of the Left," the upper-level course taught by Professor Faith Hillis, intrigues me not only because its mention of the Jewish Labor Bund intersects with my interest in the labor movement and in Jewish history, but also because its goal of recovering alternatives appeals to my belief that the study of history should show possibilities for today.

**4th paragraph**:

UChicago also offers me opportunities to fulfill my passion for civic engagement at the Institute of Politics, where speakers must take questions from students. Not only could I listen to prominent political thinkers, but I could also hear their ideas challenged. For me, the challenge is the important part. I love discussin my ideas and hearing from others, but I have not always had many discussion partners. To grow into a more sophisticated thinkers, I know I need to be challenged (and even to be shown I'm wrong sometimes). I know that UChicago is a place where no idea go unchallenged and that is why I am applying.

Hello World!
