Natalie Portman on Dreams Mattering, significant at all

I don't think so. Brain getting rid of information it does need and then your brain naturally putting it in stories.

27 May


The aesthetic failures of Them can’t be untangled from its political ones. As the characters wrestle with Betty and their neighbors’ attempts to get them out of the neighborhood — first with intimidation, then with outright violence — the directors of the show (who are all white men, with one exception) often rely on displaying the white gaze in a literal fashion. White characters glaring at the Emory family is one of the show’s central visual tropes. Epithets like “N - - - - ss,” “sow,” “animal,” “coon,” and “ape” are spit from the lips of white people, emphasizing Them’s obsession with showing the depravity of racism in extreme terms. But it doesn’t wholly consider just how damaging such language and imagery is not only for the psyche of the characters involved, but for the Black people in the audience who understand it on a visceral, intimate level. At the same time, it has nothing new to say about whiteness — how it works, how it perpetuates itself, how ingrained it is in our culture. Yes, sometimes racists are venomous, other times they’re passive. Sometimes they burn the words “n - - - - - heaven” in your yard, other times they wear a smile as they rope you into a real-estate deal you’ll never escape from. The adjacent desperations of the Emory family are meant to limn the material and psychological effects of living under the threat of anti-Blackness in America. Henry wrestles not only with being discarded and abused as an engineer in a facility that’s all white, save for the janitors, but also with his PTSD as a veteran who was experimented upon with mustard gas by the very country he swore to defend. Ruby is obsessed with whiteness in a way that only becomes clear later on. Gracie, like her sister, seems uncomfortable with what her mother represents as a Black woman, whose traumas have led her to act with an emotional intensity that they find embarrassing and “crazy.” And Lucky? Well, Lucky has to bear the weight of the world in ways so many Black women are forced to.